To bring Jesus into the lives of these people is one mission. To report my findings back to my superior. in Kebec, who will in turn send it to his back home in France, is the other. Ultimately, I write of these journeys and my struggles and my suffering to glorify You. I will die here for you if this is what is requested of me.” (28) Christophe makes a study of the “sauvages” among whom he lives, trying to learn their culture and customs, all the while scorning how “their simplicity prevents them from understanding the complexity of Catholicism” (30). He works for months to understand the “guttural intricacies” of their language from one of his converts: He explained that I had to begin to grasp. the natural world around me if I were ever to conquer. the language. The Huron, Luke said, don’t live in the natural world but as part of it. The key to their language was to make the connection between man and nature. I scoffed at this . . . You, Lord, have given us the natural world for our use and our governance. Man was not meant to grovel in the dirt with animals but to rise above them”. (31) As a Christian, Christophe believes in the Biblical Book of Genesis in which God creates the earth for which Adam and Even are To have “dominion” over the earth – in other words, to exercise control and domination over the land, the plants, the birds, the animals. All of God’s bounty is for use by men and women. Christophe is surprised to see a different world view. from his Huron hosts; he writes: Just one more reflection for now, something I find both fascinating and appalling. In matters of the spirit, these sauvages believe that we all have within us a life force that is similar if you will, to our own Catholic belief, in the soul. They call this life force the orenda. That is the fascinating part. What appalls me is that these ,poor misguided beings, believe not just humans have an orenda but also animals, trees, bodies of water, even rocks strewn on the ground. In fact, every last thing in their world contains its own spirit. . . . Bird [one of the hunters] explained it to me in a rather odd way. he told me of a recent hunting trip in which he pursued a deer for a long time. Eventually he caught up to and killed it. ‘My orenda overpowered its orenda,’ he said. ‘The deer’s orenda allowed me to take it.’ He then looked at me as if his words might explain with final clarity this strange belief of theirs. I have to admit, dear Superior, that I’m still left confused.” (31-32)


